I'm Rob Penzer. I'm the Associate Director of the Helix Center. Welcome. I want to make
some announcements about upcoming programs before I introduce today's guests. On Saturday,
April 12, physicists Harold Atman-Spacher and Edgar Cheerieri and scientist philosopher
Farsad Mahushen join Jungian analyst Joseph Cambry and Beverly Zabriski in an exploration
of synchronicity on the spectrum of mind and matter. On April 26, join us for women and
science for stemming the tide of gender-based inequity and on May 17, women and the work
world. Also watch for announcements for this year's Helix Center benefit to be held on
May 4 at Ginny's Supper Club at the Red Rooster. And now for today's introductions.
Chip Ganyon is Associate Professor of Politics at Ithaca College. And a long time visiting
scholar at Cornell University's Judith Repie Institute for Peace and Conflict Studies. He
received his PhD in political science with a focus on international relations from Columbia
University where he also received certificates in the Soviet Russian studies and Eastern
European studies. He is author of numerous articles as well as the myth of ethnic war,
Serbia and Croatia in the 1990s which was the winner of the American Political Science
Association's award for best book on European politics and society. And co-winner of the
Council for European Studies' Best First Book Award. More recently he co-edited a volume,
post-conflict studies, an interdisciplinary approach based on a series of workshops he
organized at Cornell. His research is focused on violence that is framed as ethnic and in
particular the ways in which such violence is often the result of an elite strategy of
demobilization. A related research interest is the ways in which elites construct threatening
images of the outside world as a domestic political resource. Another research project
focuses on the concept of religious missionary work as a way to understand democracy promotion
and other secular forms of international intervention focusing in particular on the Balkans.
Leah Greenfeld is University Professor and Professor of Sociology, Political Science
and Anthropology, Boston University and visiting adjunct professor at Lignon University. She
is the author among other publications of nationalism, Five Roads to Mardanity, The Spirit
of Capitalism, Nationalism and Economic Growth, and Mind, Mardanity and Madness, the impact
of culture on human experience, these form of trilogy. The latest volume focusing on the
existential experiences of Mardanity offers a novel interpretation and a causal explanation
of schizophrenia and manic depressive illness. Professor Greenfeld held the positions of
assistant as well as John L. Loeb, Associate Professor of Social Sciences at Harvard University
from 1985 until 1994 when she joined Boston University in her current appointment. She
has also held visiting positions at RPI, MIT and the Accault De Hote et Tous en Science
Societte in Paris and has been a recipient of the UAB Ireland Distinguished Visiting
Scholar Award, fellowships from the Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton, New Jersey,
the Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars in Washington, D.C., the Institute
for Advanced Studies in Jerusalem and grants from Mellon, Olin, Earhart and the National
Council for Soviet and Eastern European Research and the German Marshall Fund of the United
States. In 2004, she delivered the Gelner Lecture at the London School of Economics on
the subject of nationalism and the mind, launching the research connecting her previous work on
modern culture to a new perspective on mental illness. Excuse me. And in 2011, the Tom Nairn
Lecture at the Globalism Research Center, RMIT in Melbourne. The Least Juliano is a political
scientist at Columbia University where she teaches courses on secession and nationalism,
Russian politics and international relations. She's the academic advisor to graduate students
at Columbia's Harriman Institute for Russian, Eurasian and East European Studies. Professor
Juliano's research focuses on the intersection of politics and identity. Her book, Constructing
Grieven's Ethnic Nationalism in Russia's Republics, examines why some mass populations
in Russia's ethnic republics supported nationalist separation while others remained quascent.
In 2012, the book won the ENMISA Book Award of the International Studies Association for
the best book published over the past two years in the study of international politics
of ethnicity, nationalism or migration. Professor Juliano is currently researching the politics
of blame following natural and man-made disasters in Russia. After working as a consultant in
Moscow and Novograd for USAID on a privatization project in the 1990s, she conducted field research
in Tatarstan, Russia as a Fulbright Hayes scholar. Professor Juliano has taught at the
University of Miami and Barnard College and she currently serves on the advisory board
for the Association of the Study of Nationalities and is a member of the program on new approaches
to research and security in Eurasia. Professor Juliano has a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard
University, the University of Notre Dame and Columbia. She received a PhD in political
science and an MA in international relations from the University of Chicago and a BA in
Russian studies from the University of Pennsylvania. Liora Khan is founder and president of Proof
Media for Social Justice. She works on global projects with Amnesty International and the
United Nations. Her 2007 book, Darfur, 20 Years of War and Genocide, has won several
awards and an exhibition of this work as traveling in the U.S. under the auspices of the Holocaust
Museum of Houston. Her book, Child Soldiers, published in November 2008, features an introductory
essay by Louis Moreno-Ocampo, chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Court. She
curated an exhibition on child soldiers in collaboration with the UN's Office on Children
and Armed Conflict. It has traveled to Rome, New York, Bonn, Vienna, Mexico City, as well
as the United States. Miss Khan's film credits include Renee and I, an award-winning documentary
about the life of an extraordinary woman who was experimented on by Joseph Mangla during
the Holocaust. She also co-produced Original Intent, a documentary that explores the judicial
philosophy promoted by President George W. Bush and the Supreme Court justices Antonin
Scalia and Clarence Thomas. She was director of photography at workman publishing in Corbus
as well as working at the New York Times Magazine, Time Magazine and numerous other publications.
She has been a fellow in the genocide studies program at Yale University, where she conducts
research on rescuers and rescuing behavior. She lectures and teaches widely on topics
in human rights and photography and transitional justice. She is a Fulbright senior specialist
and recently taught at University of Haifa and is fellow at the Adrienne DeRosse Child
Columbia University and Cambridge University for social entrepreneurs that involve starting
a network between Jews and Muslims. Miss Khan's recent work has taken to Rwanda, Cambodia
and Bosnia, where she has researched and interviewed rescuers from these gemicides. An exhibition
comprised of photos and texts of these interviews is now traveling in Rwanda, Bosnia and Cambodia
as well as the United States, sponsored by the US State Department. She has developed
a worldwide project on rape and transitional justice with partners, trial and UNFPA.
Nathan Schanberg is a Wallerstein research fellow in psychoanalysis of the San Francisco
Center for psychoanalysis on the faculty at New York's psychoanalytic society and institute
and formerly Freud professor of psychoanalysis at the Hebrew University. He is the author
editor of four books and one novella, educating the emotions on Bruno Betelheim's ideas, lives
across time with Henry Massey, reluctant warriors, the naturations and interlives of elite Israeli
soldiers and Sheba and Solomon's return Ethiopian children in Israel, which was a foundational
study for our recent round table on that subject. He studied at the University of Chicago College
and Medical School where his teachers included Bruno Betelheim and Saul Bello. He graduated
from the St. Louis psychoanalysis institute and he is training analyst of the Israel
psychoanalysis society in IPA and I think most of you know Dr. Edward Nussesian, director
of and founder of the Helix Center. So we'll begin.
So I have a question, what do we mean by fanaticism?
I had the same question.
Because I personally find it a kind of problematic term.
I said what do we mean by fanaticism? I personally find it a kind of problematic term.
Well, one of the best ways of answering this question is would it people who invented the
word meant by fanaticism? Of course now we mean all sorts of things. But it is interesting
that the word only appears in the English language in the sixteenth century. At which
time it basically refers to a sort of abnormal behavior that that characterizes one as mad.
The word mad also appears only in the word madness also appear only in the sixteenth
century. And specifically it refers to being mad as a result of intervention of bad spirits,
demons. But there was actually a mental disease at that time that was diagnosed as a result
of the intervention of demons. But what is much more interesting is that in the middle
of the seventeenth century after the Puritan rebellion and already after nationalism was
firmly established in England that the word fanaticism is used specifically for religious
mania, mania precisely in the sense in which we understand it now in psychiatry. And for
political enthusiasm which is which goes overboard. And it is in this sense of unreasonable enthusiasm
for political causes or religious causes that we mostly understand fanaticism now. Now the
connection between the word itself and the phenomenon that is observed in the sixteenth
and seventeenth century to begin with and nationalism which also is something that emerges
in the sixteenth century in England is therefore very clear. So fanaticism comes into our life
not with any identity. There are always lots of identities and human beings do not live
without an identity. But it comes into our life very specifically with national identity.
And the question therefore becomes what is it in nationalism that provokes fanaticism?
I wanted to take some two different perspectives as I was asked to think about this. One is
a developmental perspective. When do people have the capacity to become fanatical or nationalistic?
Generally speaking it is sometime in adolescence or late adolescence and later. We do not usually
call six year olds or nine year olds fanatical. They can be preoccupied with New York Yankees
but we do not call them fanatical in that sense. So something happens around late adolescence.
I want to suggest and that brings us closer to issues of identity and arrogance and work
on that. So that is one thing to raise. The other is when I was asked again to talk about
this I thought of both Hannah Arendt's opening to her book on Eichmann in Jerusalem and
other times. As kind of the other side of what am I calling, if we do not know what fanaticism
is yet we may clarify that in this meeting. What is the other side of fanaticism in the
20th, 21st century? So Eichmann says in the beginning of her book when cliches and stock
phrases begin replacing critical thinking it is a danger to society. That was one of
the major lessons from watching the Eichmann trial. People will think critically in a
certain way and then start not thinking critically and using stock phrases and cliches. A compliment
to that, again I rent as a political philosopher but a compliment to that is a bellheim's comment,
the subtitle of his book The Informed Heart which describes his experience in Dachau and
experience of others later on in concentration camp is that the danger he thought and great
dark genius of the Nazi invention was to use modern technologies of social communication,
mass communication to influence larger groups in a certain way. The challenge he thought
was not to think of Nazism as a unique experience but one that can be repeated, number one.
Number two, he said the challenge in the 20th century and today is the subtitle of his book,
how do we develop and maintain autonomy in a mass age and by autonomy he means the old
Greek definition, self rule as opposed to I want to suggest fanaticism might be other
ruled as an initial definition.
I can pick up a little bit on that because the work that I do with rescuers is about
how they identify staying with the original group identity instead of going and become
perpetrators and fanatics. Those are questions that aren't asked that often because we usually
think of a group as all the Germans became perpetrators or all the Hutus became perpetrators.
So the questions I ask and then I'm very interested in is why do the Hutus or why are there good
Germans and how they resist being swept up into a fanatical kind of identity. And I find
that a challenge to think about but it's a question that I work on and I think it's
important because we do study a lot about the fanaticism, we don't study a lot about
resisting it.
But what I would say that to resist prejudice one needs to be fanatical. The mother Teresa
is a fanatic about what she did. This is provocative.
No I think what you said about the critical thinking is really important. I think if you
are a critical thinker, really a critical thinker you won't give in to the fanaticism
and I think that's a really important point and I'm really glad you brought that up because
a lot of these authoritarian countries and societies don't install critical thinking
and you've studied all those. You've studied the Balkans and societies that don't encourage
independent critical thinking and I think that's where the danger comes in to become
a nationalist or a fanaticist that you don't think about what it means.
Well it might be useful to define some terms at this point just because probably some people
around this table are using the term nationalism in different ways. And also just on the point
of fanaticism or fanatic as a word nobody's mentioned just a common usage of the term
in everyday life and it seems to me that the way we use it in everyday life is just to
talk about people we disagree with or ideas we find reprehensible whereas everyone here
is using it in a more academic or specific sense. But it can be hard to disentangle these
days the term fanatic is often used to apply to or it follows the word Muslim and it usually
means people who engage in violence or terrorism to achieve their goals. So already we have
different ways of using the term fanatic and different ways of using the term nationalism.
So maybe it would be useful for people to each of us to try to talk about what we mean
by nationalism. The way I think academics study nationalism in a specific time and place
is very different than common place understanding of nationalism which often refers to Nazism
or to some type of more extreme behavior.
So let me try and do that even though I am a fanatical academic one could say by using
fanaticism in the way that you propose. But I'm trying actually to study those phenomena
precisely in the sense in which they are used by people and even if those people who use
them do not define them explicitly to themselves nevertheless when forced to define those terms
and I sometimes force my students for example to try and define the terms they constantly
use they would define it in those very ways. So it is in fact very important to define nationalism
and fanaticism and nationalism contrary to the ways in which it is very often bandied
around by the media. Nationalism refers to our contemporary view of reality.
And my classes I very often ask students and it is a very good exercise. Ask students
in the beginning of the classes to give me a pictogram that is a very very short telegraphic
drawing of the world in which they live. And it is amazing American students, students
in Europe, students in Africa, students everywhere basically come with the same drawing and
this drawing reflects the essence of nationalism because our contemporary world is defined by
nationalism. Nationalism is the cultural dream of contemporary world as we live in it.
And what is this drawing and what is this world? We see the world unlike people in other types
of societies and in other historical periods. We see the world as first of all this world,
this globe, the world of our empirical experiences, the world of living people, this earth in
distinction to religious people who see this earth, this world of the living people only
is a very very small piece of a grand huge world most of which is transcendental. And
we see this world as the source of all law, of all truth and of all meaning while they
those other people see the grand transcendental world with God or gods in it as the source
of all meaning, all law and all truth. In addition, we in contemporary people, modern
people defined by nationalism, safe society is based on two principles, on the principle
of popular sovereignty and on the principle of the fundamental equality of membership
in the nation. And we see the world as divided into nations. Nation is defined precisely as
a sovereign community of equals. Now clearly, the Iranian nation, a sovereign Iranian community
of equals would be very different from the American nation, a sovereign American community
of equals. Nevertheless, as sovereign communities of equals, they are both national societies
and secular societies because even though religion plays very important part in both
in different ways but in both because we are focused on this world. When the individual
in monotheistic religions in particular, when the individual is determined religiously
and sees the world as a religious universe, grand transcendental universe in which this
Earth is only a tiny part, then the most important things for this individual be here. Muslim,
a Jew or a Christian would be his or her soul, salvation and eternal life after death. What
is happening in the few years before death is really not that important. For us, the
modern people based on nationalism, the only important thing is what happens in this life.
We really do not care at all. Even those of us who consider ourselves religious, we do
not really do not care at all about what happens after death and we do not care at all about
our meeting with our maker and what he has to think about our actions here. That is why
we are all Muslims, Christians, doesn't matter, are so tremendously politically activist in
our lives. Such activism was simply impossible in the different religious conception of the
world. So nationalism, basically it is this new perspective on the reality that first
emerges in England in the 16th century and then spreads through the entire world. More
or less now it is spreading through the entire world. And it brings with it some wonderful
things, wonderful things. It brings with it first of all democracy. It also brings with
it economy oriented towards growth and with this much greater wealth, it also brings with
it science, science which was impossible when we were religiously oriented because the empirical
knowledge about this world was of no importance.
Yeah, interrupt your second because I am a little bit still stuck with your original
comment and I cannot get it out of my mind. What you were objecting or you were saying
of a problem with the term. Maybe you can link to nationalism and the way nationalism
is used generally is somewhat different than what Leah is saying. It is more attachment
to a nation defined in ethnolinguistic terms, attachment to a territory which is narrower
than the definition that you are giving. And the problem I have with the term fanaticism
is it is almost too easy or these people are crazy. We don't have to understand what is
going on with them. Why are they acting this way? The other thing is it tends to lump
people into groups. So for example I start my book out with in Serbia in the media which
was controlled by the government. The images that you saw through the 80s and early 90s
were terrible. They were just Serbs are being slaughtered in Croatia, women and children,
Serbs are victims, etc. You would expect that that would create sort of the solidarity in
a sense of high sense of groupness among Serbs who would then. But in fact what happened
is when the government called up young men for the draft in Belgrade, the capital city,
80 to 90% of them refused to go. They went into hiding or left the country. In the country
as a whole it was 50%. And the reason it was lower in the country as a whole is people
live in villages and it is not quite as easy to get away because of the social networks.
So that tells us something else is going on. This is not fanaticism. This is something
that the government is trying to get people to do. They are using images and trying to
use fear and emotion to get people to do things but it wasn't really working. Now obviously
some people did go to the front and the question of why they did that is a valid one. But I
start with the anecdote about so many young men refusing to fight because it really puts
into question a lot of the images we have about conflicts like the ones we saw in the
former Yugoslavia and other places as well. Does that go along with what? Can I ask you
a question about that? How does that relate to the paramilitaries in Bosnia? Do you think
those images created a more national identity of the ones that were fighting in Bosnia?
Well the paramilitaries that were sent into Bosnia from Serbia and from Croatia during
that phase of the war were in every society and you have groups of guys who were just
into that kind of violence and killing. What were they motivated by? Maybe some of them
but a lot of it wasn't. It was just the thrill of being a hero wanting to have action in
your life.
There are shivls addressed that with the German soldiers though. What motivated them? When
they were asked to study the captured German soldiers, young men, and they knew they were
losing. This was in 1945, I think. And shills and jonamoots were clever enough to say how
come these guys are fighting so hard still? And what they found when they interviewed
if I remember correctly what they found was the major motivation was not for Germany,
not for Adolf Hitler. It was their buddies in their units. And this is what I found in
studying the Israeli soldiers, not to that degree. To a great degree I studied soldiers
in elite units. I remember one of them said to me, the first year of his training he said
he would say, I will fight for my brothers, I will die for my brothers. He said he didn't
feel it until the end of the year and then he realized he really would.
Right. And this is regular soldiers but you asked me about the paramilitaries which were
not regular soldiers. These were groups who did a lot of criminal, a lot of the war crimes
were done by paramilitary groups. They were associated with some of the political parties.
But the point is yes, they did awful things but they were a very small minority of the
guys who were potentially going to go fight in the war from Serbia. Now if you're in Bosnia
itself, you're in a different situation. The war is happening in your country. And to
understand that, I won't go into great detail now, but there was a long campaign to create
a climate of fear. And even in that people had to be forced, not everyone. Obviously
there were small numbers of people who were really into it but people had to be forced
to sort of separate. And the violence was actually a means of separating people who had been
organic communities before. So I'm talking about this because when we look at a war like
that it's easy to say, oh they're fanatics, they're crazy. But in fact if you sort of
look at sort of a micro level, there's a lot of different things going on. And the problem
with the term fanatics is it makes it too easy. They're all foaming at the mouth militia
which is appealing to them as serves but that's not what was happening. And so my problem
with the term fanatics is that it's sort of the way it's commonly used. It's used as
sort of the shorthand that means they're just kind of crazy. Which is not...
Well, there's such as fanatic about teachers.
But I want to... Because you were making an interesting point distinguishing the modern
past from the very religious. And how does that play into this issue that they're describing?
Yes, let me continue. So this is a long story unfortunately. I'm sorry for taking so much
time. But nationalism brought to us lots of wonderful things but it also brought us some
absolutely horrible things. And the most terrible things, the most terrible problem that nationalism
has created, it brought to us schizophrenia and demonic depression. That is, together
with nationalism, they're emerged at the very same time in 16th century England. They're
emerged as a new mental disease. We know that this disease is new because out of the very
large vocabulary for mental diseases that exist at the time, no word seems to capture
it and new words are invented to capture. And the new words that are invented are madness
and lunacy.
But that doesn't... Sometimes you have new words for old phenomena.
What in this case?
Let me mention the Malius Maleficorum which was well before the 17th century.
I'm talking about 16th century, the beginning of the 16th century.
But in the Malius Maleficorum which was in the Deval text, yes?
They describe what we would today call psychosis, usually schizophrenia. But they don't use
those words, they use things about inhabited by the devil or the witch's and so on. So
just because a new word is invented doesn't mean that it's a new phenomenon.
In this case I'm talking about a new phenomenon because yes, there was psychosis, there was
something new that emerged that wasn't like lots of other psychosis, many of which were
indeed interpreted as fanaticism, as Maleficians, demons.
Those people were called among other things, dewony, et cetera.
Yes, but what emerges is something completely different.
That emerges and what is remarkably striking, it is so striking that not only new words
emerge, but a completely new discourse emerges in jurisprudence, in medicine and in theology.
The first hospital, the first hospital in the sense in which we understand a medical establishment
for treatment of disease is emerges at which hospital is that it is Badlam, the hospital
for those madmen.
And ulegislation emerges which never existed, which treats only specifically those madmen,
not demoniacy, not the other psychotics, but only those.
What is so specific about them, what is so, and of course the entire Elizabethan and
then Jacobian literature, including Shakespeare, which is very important, is focused on madness.
The four great Shakespeare's tragedy are all focused on madness.
It is a new phenomenon.
What is so specific about this phenomenon is that it is seen as an existential experience
because it lasts forever.
When one first is affected by it, it will not disappear with age, it will not disappear
with certain physical conditions.
All the other say causes are either age related or have certain other biological conditions
affiliated with them.
And either in death with those other conditions or in cure with those other conditions.
Those seem to be those that later were called schizophrenia and manic depressive illness,
precisely diseases that until now exist without a known organic basis.
They become the basis of psychiatry.
Now what happens with that?
And why nationalism?
Because they seem to be related very, very tightly to the problems with the definition
of individual identity that nationalism creates.
By defining all the members of the nation as equal, it places the burden for the definition
of the individual identity on the person.
And for very many, this burden seems to be too much.
And indeed, when we analyze schizophrenia and manic depression, we can see how great the
self problems are in those diseases.
Now in all the other societies, the individual's position was defined by birth.
If one was born a daughter of a shoemaker, it was clear that one would then become the
wife of a shoemaker and the mother of shoemakers.
And what one is supposed to do in life was absolutely clear.
Two such details as what kinds of clothes one would wear, what kinds of food one would
eat, what kinds of holidays one would celebrate.
So what defined by birth and by God?
The place where God has placed you.
But now everyone can be whatever one wants and one has to define oneself.
And very often one feels that one made the wrong choice and experiences problems with
oneself, hates oneself.
It is from this problem with individual identity, specifically from the complex of inferiority
that fanaticism emerges.
Sankhand.
What do you think?
What kind of essay question?
Yes.
I wanted to ask a question because her work is really, I mean, talking about, it relates
to the work that you've done and why some naturalists support separatism and why some,
the work that you've just been doing, I think that really relates to sort of what Leah is
saying, why some can sort of break away like me, my work and why.
And especially, of course, what's happening today in Russia and the Ukraine.
I would love to hear what you have to say about that.
Well, I mean, one of the other big questions that was posed to us on this panel is when
do members of a group form or when do people become members of a group and then when does
that group maybe become fanatical?
Is that the second question?
But yeah, I think it's really important just as it's important to be careful about using
the term fanaticism as a way of labeling something we don't understand and labeling a form of
violence or willingness to give one's life or take a life based on an ideology.
That's often the way I think we come in a complex way that we use fanaticism.
For example, we don't really talk about Patrick Henry, give me liberty or give me death as
a fanatic or we don't talk about students who gave their life at Tiananmen Square as fanatics.
It's usually something that embodies an ideology that we just don't get or don't agree with.
Well, do you think they are?
Do you think they are?
Fanatics?
Well, I guess if we use the term as willingness to die, which seems sort of like irrational
behavior, it can be defined as fanatical.
But the problem with that term is that you are saying that person is a believer in an
ideology or a member of a group only because they believe in this ideology and you're
not taking into consideration that there can be other motivations for that kind of behavior.
Even in the case for something that appears to be as extreme as a suicide bomber or a
member of Al-Qaeda who's part of 9-11.
There could be other motivations, some of them rational, some of them of the kind you
describe that soldiers face.
The group in group love or affiliation that motivate people to give their life on behalf
of their brethren or the people they consider theirs.
Can I?
Let me take from my perspective as an analyst now just a couple of thoughts.
One is to use a turn to a developmental perspective to look at Erickson's work on identity and
identity formation to look at Erickson's ideas and his book Escape from Freedom, which
I think you alluded to that some people can't tolerate the responsibility that comes with
the democratic freedom.
And he suggests that the challenge for democratic societies is when you have external freedom
then to develop internal freedoms and a sense of responsibility over one's actions.
And from his talking about something that happens in adolescence, late adolescence in
general.
But the nature of Erickson's work, and he was the master of writing about identity a man
who never knew who his father was and when he was in analysis with Anna Freud said, I
have a chance to find out where my father is.
And she said, don't.
You can't.
You're not allowed to.
And he didn't.
And regretted listening to her the rest of his life.
Who named himself by his last name, Eric's son, because he didn't know who his father
was.
He was the master of identity in a sense.
And he talks about the importance of adolescence as a time to begin to assemble like Legos
or something and concretize and solidify who I think I am, who I belong with or to, and
beginning to extend my belonging system from my family to outside family, friends and peers,
groups and such.
That's just one place to start.
And then we can look at adolescence and ask them, whom do you consider part of the group
and who's nuts about this?
Who goes way overboard?
Or I'll give you another example in a moment.
But Erickson, even he pointed out that there were cultural differences that surprised him.
When he moved to the States, he was impressed and surprised and talked about in his book
Identity and Youth Formation that American youth were more interested in being part of
a group than his experience in Europe, his experience, I'm not saying European youth.
In Europe as a vonderfulgal before he went and joined Anna Freud's kindergarten to teach
with Peter Blos, who was a faculty member here, it was important to be independent and alone
and self-ruling and against us.
And he comes to America and he finds youth don't value that as much.
And he's puzzled and I don't think he used the word concern.
It was Eric Fromm who was concerned about that.
So one place to start is that period.
Then another example of cultural difference I'll mention of the issue of fanatical.
So when we had the second Lebanese war, I went up north.
I was volunteering as a physician.
I was teaching at the university at the time.
But I volunteered as a physician because I wanted to meet the soldiers I had interviewed
in my study as they came back from Lebanon.
That was the way I could do it.
It was to go up north.
And when they came back, and these were guys who were in elite units, they were put into
Lebanon three days, 72 hours, fight and then pulled out.
And they described real disarray as Israeli government tried to run the war from Tel Aviv.
Real disarray.
But I won't go into that.
What shocked them was in fighting what was called Hezbollah, there were two groups of
soldiers they fought.
One was a massive young man running at them, shooting without aiming, sacrificing themselves.
And behind them were snipers who would use the guys running in front to identify where
his early soldiers were and pick them off.
But my soldier said they couldn't get their heads around, these guys running in front.
It didn't feel like a war.
It felt like a slaughter to them.
And that ran counter to their own identities.
So there was a cultural difference.
Or when there was a mother of a suicide bomber who lived in a village just opposite my apartment
in Jerusalem, and her son shoots a bunch of yeshiva boys and is killed.
And she drapes her, I could see her house was draped in big Hamas green flags and says
I have, and she points to her seven year olds and I have another one to sacrifice.
And my Israeli students said they don't get this.
So they don't get what?
They don't get how my mother could say, my six year old, I have another six year old
to sacrifice.
What are you saying that though publicly?
It doesn't matter.
No Israeli mother I knew would say that I knew or was advertised as saying that publicly.
That I knew.
There may have been some who might have but none that I knew.
My point is that when you ask, you ask the raise the question of fanaticism and how do
we define it, I'm reminded of when the Supreme Court, nine justices all mail at the time,
were asked to study pornography and they were asked how do you define it?
And one of them said I forgot who.
I thought Justice Potter said, I knew it when I see it.
Not a bad place to start.
I would disagree because you're seeing something you don't understand.
Okay that seems like fanaticism.
That doesn't mean that's what's going on.
You don't understand.
Robert Pape, Mia Bloom have done books on suicide bombing that go into great detail explaining
what's behind this thing that seems insane to us and fanatical.
And so this is my problem with fanaticism.
It's like, oh they're fanatics.
That's all there is to it.
So maybe but if you just assume that you're not really going to understand what's going
on.
Where do they see themselves?
How could they're human beings like you and me?
How could some human being be put into place when they're doing that?
That's the question to ask rather than to just assume or to use the term.
Which is sort of what you're saying.
I know it when I see it.
I know it when I see it and let's find out what's behind it.
So like when Bethlehem and Janowitz studied US soldiers returning from World War II to
look at prejudice and they found 44% of US soldiers were prejudice against blacks and
Jews.
And they were very stereotyped.
Blacks smelled bad, had big genitals and would rape their wives.
And Jews were very smart and would steal the white out of your eyes and take your jobs.
That was fairly stereotypical among them.
So they came out of figure 44% prejudice like that's scary.
But then they listened to the interviews which were done on wire recorders.
They found that it was 14% there were four groups in the 44%.
14% were what they called hardcore prejudice who said if I could kill them I would.
The only thing that stops me is the law, the reverend and my wife.
It's that 14% that Peter Fonigy recently referred to as malignant prejudice as supposed to what
Peter says what we mostly all have is what he calls benign prejudice.
So the issue is not prejudice or not.
Peter suggests.
You're connecting fanaticism with prejudice?
I am.
Do you agree with them?
Well, again, I'm not going to use the word fanaticism myself.
I mean, I understand what you're saying and people act like that but I won't use the term
because of the, so let me just give another example from Serbia.
I mean, again, the image of the people who did go off to fight that they were just like
these kind of, they were just going, oh, and they just want to go kill people are different.
In fact, if you look at the discourse they were responding to, it was very clearly a
discourse of injustice.
They were convinced and they were motivated by horrible injustices that they believed
that they were being told were being committed against people, women, children, innocent
civilians for no other reason that they're served.
So yeah, there's an identity, there's an identification but it's not just sort of like
these people are crazy.
They're like, there's an understandable motivation that I think any of us could understand if
we put it in those terms.
And so again, the idea is to understand why people go off and fight wars that from our
perspective seem like these people are crazy, ancient haters, they're killing each other.
Actually if you look at the sort of on the ground processes, it's very understandable.
You don't have to agree with what they're doing.
It's very understandable and you can't say it's a group against a group, right?
If you have 80% of Serbian guys not wanting to fight, if embossing a people are sort of
forced to fight and they're sort of like put in situations where there's no choice, something
else is going on there.
It's not just identity.
Identity is obviously the category that you belong to is important.
But to use Brbaker's terms, groupness is not automatic.
Groupness is something that has to be created.
And even when there's a high sense of groupness, everyone in that group or in that category
is not going to be responding in the same way.
And even a majority may not.
So I think the link.
So are you saying the modern man, the modern us that we don't like to kill people?
By and large we don't want to kill people.
I'm not going to generalize.
But then some of us or some people become part of some group for whatever reason and then
they're willing to do that.
Take that step.
I think people in general, some people are willing to kill for things they believe deeply
in.
I mean, if you join the US Army and are willing to do that then no one questions that.
So you're not a fanatic if you're in the US Army and you go out and you kill that part
of your job.
So then at which point do you become a fanatic?
I'm not going to use that term.
Sorry.
In Colombia.
And actually we should not generalize.
But we should explain certain trends.
There are different trends in society.
No society is one trend.
There is no such thing.
So let me first address the problem of age and adolescence and second the problem of
cultural differences.
They're obviously both age and cultural differences plain to that.
And as they overlap in very different ways they create those specifically active groups.
So the problem with individual identity and nationalism are particularly sharp, acute,
and cause particularly many problems as we Americans know probably better than any other
people during other lessons.
Young adults is precisely the age when severe mental illness is usually diagnosed in this
society.
But in addition to that we have now in universities according to the latest surveys.
Twenty-five percent, it was twenty several years ago, but now twenty-five percent of students
which means one in four of our students who is severely depressed, clinically depressed.
This is one of those diseases, right?
And hates his own guts, first of all completely maladjusted and of course hates the guts of
everyone else being severely depressed.
Do you give me the reference on that?
Yes, I will give it to you.
I don't have it right now, but I will give it to you.
It is a special college survey of 2012.
The latest data, I'll give it to you.
It is in my book actually the reference.
Well, so it is at this time indeed when we have most of those problems.
Now what happens in the United States?
In the United, we are talking of course about a much larger group, again, Kessler's surveys,
National Institute of Mental Health, the recent that around fifty percent in American population
are somewhat mentally ill.
So we are not talking, we are talking about those colossal horrendous figures.
So we are not talking mostly about really severely ill people.
We are talking about enormous millions and millions of fellow citizens who experience
terrible general malaise.
Now what happens in the United States?
In the United States, which is the individualistic society, I define it as such because of the
type of nationalism.
I can go into that.
In this society, really severely ill people who are not taken care of would end like Adam
Lanza or other shooters in schools and in colleges.
This happens in our society constantly.
It seems to be a particular American pastime.
But in other societies, in other societies, in collectivistic societies, such for example
is Germany or is Serbia or is Russia.
They are likely to engage in collective action, not in individual.
Excuse me, Russia just had its first school shooting.
Oh, it did.
Some places, yes, it did.
And some countries in northern Europe are copycat.
I'm going to add something.
Just footnotes about that.
Diagnosis is a mess in American society, contemporary's country, except since the time
of the Bloyler, we are pretty good at diagnosing men and oppressive illness and remain so and
we are good at diagnosing true schizophrenia.
Those are the two diagnoses that have remained from the time of Bloyler and the Switzerland
to appear.
And as I recall, I haven't kept up with the epidemiology.
The rates are fairly consistent.
And I mean, let me finish.
But I don't understand that I think you are trying to make the point that I'm still not
catching it.
If you are saying fanaticism is a consequence of mental illness or are you making a broader
point that I'm not catching?
Yes.
Well, let me start again.
No, don't start again.
That's been launched.
Don't start again.
I've been there for years.
Try to go to the conclusion.
Yes, maybe you want to.
I don't know.
There is a general idea that in a three years society more difficult for a clear identity.
In general, in a society, in modern society, it's very difficult to form a clear identity.
But people with problems with identity, in liberal societies such as the United States,
are going to act on their own.
They're going to erupt on their own.
Can I interrupt on this?
Because the fact you talked about collectivist societies, they act together.
So in Serbia, these paramilitary groups often were people like this, not only, but people
like that.
But they weren't just acting on their own.
They were brought together by particular people in the government who wanted this kind of
people to be willing to do this kind of almost.
Exactly.
It was working.
I was working.
And I mean, you interviewed.
I've interviewed a lot of those people.
I've also, I mean, I think what I'm interested in about what everybody's saying is, and especially
what Chip was talking about, how, I mean, I don't know that much about Serbia more about
Bosnia, but why was there, I mean, I see it as they were nationalists.
I'm not talking about fanaticism, fanaticism, whatever.
I mean, that to me is much more relevant to the work that I think the three of us are
doing.
But why, and you talked about images, how did the people resist those horrible images
and all of the propaganda that they were throwing out saying they were killing your neighbors,
you're going to be killed in your, it would happen in Rwanda too.
I mean, they, in Rwanda, they were saying, you know, your neighbor's going to come and
stab you in the back.
I mean, that's how they got a lot of the Hutus to, you know, kill each other because they
were scared and it was a propaganda.
So it did create this political...
What are they saying that, the people who were saying that, what were they saying that?
They were saying that.
Why were they saying that?
They were saying that because they wanted them to get, you know, pick up arms and kill
the other.
They didn't like the other...
What was the game?
Power.
It's all about power.
They were in power.
France and the United States was pressuring them to have elections which they would have
lost.
And they were a piece of money.
And this is a way to sort of say, you know, to shift the focus.
But it's really about exploiting the identity.
Yeah.
And what I'm interested in, what you were saying was how, I mean, this large number of
Serbian, you know, in Serbia resisted those negative stereotypes and the propaganda.
If you think about what Leah was saying, I mean, some people are going to be more apt
to be really motivated by those kinds of images and not question them because of their own
personal issues.
Other people were very skeptical of them and didn't believe what the government...
And in fact, we can say the majority of young guys who were being called up, they had their
own lives just like no one wants to go and give up your girlfriend and your VCR and
your...
And their jobs.
Jobs if you had one, but still to go off, especially if you're skeptical.
And so I haven't seen any actual study of...
Well, actually there is someone who she hasn't published yet, but she did interviews with
volunteers that is guys who volunteer to go fight and resistors the draft dodgers.
And she did a really interesting study of that.
But I think...
I think the...
I would say that those ones that were doing those were mentally ill.
So I mean...
What did you say there?
I mean, from what I gather from them, maybe I'm completely off, there's a lot of mental
illness in some of those people that have went off and I mean, most of them are...
Well, I'm saying, look, let's look at it from the other point of view, right?
If we have 20% which is an enormous amount, by the way, the rates, they increase continuously.
It stopped in England, but not in this country.
So if we are talking about 20% of ill people, we have 80% who are well.
We have 80% who are well.
A person, I remember an example from...
Well, I'll interrupt you for two seconds.
We're talking about...
So the work that we're talking about is why people do these things in conflict and violence.
So is that...
And I'm just trying...
I'm not to be rude, but just to bring it back to what discussion and what Freud and Einstein
were saying about violence, would you say, and other people agree, that those people that
do extreme violence have a mental illness that are not exhibiting social behavior?
And I throw it out to the group.
Well, I remember that very famous nationalist, Russian nationalist, Karam Zim from the very
beginning, who said, very, very good thing.
A person who is happy about himself would find good things everywhere.
People who have a stable and satisfactory individual identity would not participate in
those actions.
There are many such people.
However, now scientists...
For instance, don't even start with Aijwan.
When you read his documents, you see how absolutely mad he was.
Okay, so let's go on to a level...
But I wonder if we could get back to it, at least if she didn't get to answer a question.
Because here you have cases where it seems like it's the same, but very different outcomes.
Well, I guess you're asking about violence, but we could also ask a little bit, broaden
the question, actually the way it was posed here, to us, which is, when do people join
groups that have a common sense of identity?
And then when does that group maybe become phonetical?
Or when does the phonetical book maybe become violent?
Well, I think that the way, just like earlier, we were talking about how the label of fanaticism
is maybe not so helpful in allowing us to understand human behavior.
I think often the label of ethnic group, or even group, is not so helpful in helping us
to understand people's behavior, especially with regard to supporting nationalism or supporting
what's being called in our society, ethnic violence.
And there are many reasons for that.
So we were starting to talk about that before.
When you asked what are some of the reasons, I mean, at a most basic level in Yugoslavia,
you could say first of all, Serbs or Krazar-Baznins had multiple identities.
This is the basic point that people are familiar with.
People have multiple identities, young man, husband, father identities, regional identities,
urban identities, identities as a professional, identities as a communist, or an incipient
Democrat.
And whether one of those or another of those is going to be the one that informs their
political behavior is an open question.
But now that there's been violence there, we tend to look at it as a place where ethnic
identities are always the paramount identity.
And that move obscures more than it reveals because we tend to think, well, people there
are members of ethnic groups, and that's how they condition all of their political and
social behavior.
When it wasn't the case before, the war isn't the case after the war.
So that's one kind of simple way of thinking about how ethnic group label can impede our
understanding of why there's going to be violence in one place or another.
So like ships work because I'm not going to describe your work for kids.
You know, basically try to show why the ethnic identity came to the fore or how in some ways
the understandings of the past were brought into the present by political entrepreneurs
and political leaders in order to mobilize people to support, to feel like they're part
of an ethnic group and then to support violence.
So then why were there different outcomes in Russia?
Well, good question.
That's a question that I spent many years working on for my book.
And so I studied why do people support nationalist movements in some cases and not in other cases.
And I looked at a bunch of cases you never heard of, a bunch of places you never heard
of because there wasn't violence and there wasn't strong nationalist mobilization.
Now the one people probably heard of is Chechnya because there was a war that's been labeled
an ethnic war or a nationalist war because Chechnya wanted to secede.
And I compared it to the other republics within Russia, especially Tatarstan where I did my
research, which was quite nationalist but that didn't go all the way towards separatism
and had decreasing levels of support for the opposition nationalists that were trying
to create a statehood.
And then I compared to a bunch of other republics that are not on many Americans radar screen
because they had very weak nationalist movements despite the presence of ethnic entrepreneurs
or nationalist leaders in all of these places.
And sort of a long story but a lot of this has to do with why we first of all might expect
there to be nationalist mobilization or support for nationalism.
We expected, a lot of people expected it in Yugoslavia because of what had happened in
the past there and the kind of, how can I say, that coming and going of politically relevant
ethnic identities in modern history in that region of the world and in the Soviet Union,
I mean in Russia we might have expected it because we just saw the Soviet Union collapse
along ethnic lines in part because the Soviet state actually unintentionally reinforced
certain kinds of national or ethnic identities and in a way told people that certain territories
belong to them and suggested that if political conditions would allow it, meaning a weaker
authoritarian center, then there could be a chance for nationalities, Ukrainians, Kazakhs,
and Estonians to get their own state. So it was a big fear in the early years of Russia
that some of the ethnic groups in Russia would do the same thing.
And I think that, or the thing I argue which is probably not so popular among in common
understandings of nationalism because people see nationalism everywhere, support for nationalism
everywhere, support for the idea of a nation state. And the idea of a nation state as Leah
described is so powerful in the modern times, that's why you have all these nationalist
movements, but actually to get people to support nationalism when it might mean risk to themselves
could mean death, right, could mean more, or it could mean something lesser than that,
like losing your job or just coming out on the wrong side of a political competition
and supporting the wrong horse, it's actually harder for, harder for nationalist entrepreneurs
or politicians to mobilize people behind nationalism than I think is commonly understood.
And several reasons for this have to do with the fact that one, people have multiple identities,
they have multiple political identities, they think about things in different ways. And
so to get people to support nationalism is a very strong idea that one, we are a group,
this is the, we are a national group, this is the main group that should matter to you,
and two, this group needs to have its own state and needs to fight for its own independent
state. So it's not easy, it's not like saying, you know, would you like to join a political
party, it's a strong commitment. So to make people perceive their national identity as
paramount compared to all of their other identities or as the way in which they should interpret
all of their experiences is not necessarily an easy thing. And nationalist entrepreneurs
can't just appear, I think, and say, you know what, you are, um, ta-ta, or you are
a cha-chan and therefore you should support a nationalist state. Now for some people, it's,
they're told a certain story about their history and how their, their glorious statehood was
denied and that makes sense. And for other people they say, well, no, I'm not just ta-ta,
or I'm not just ta-chan, I'm also a Russian, or I'm also a Soviet, or I'm also, um, you
know, a professor, or I'm also a worker, and I've got to go to work right now. So I'm
not sorry, I don't have time to go to your demonstration. Sort of daily choices like
that make it a lot harder. So I think nationalist entrepreneurs have to introduce a whole way
of dividing up the population that exists into categories and diminishing other identities
and helping people perceive information in ethnified terms.
And if I can add here, violence is a really crucial way to do that. So the violence preceded
the solidifying ethnic identities that didn't follow from it. Sort of the violence and
the war is what created that kind of higher sense of groupness.
So is nationalism in decline? Well, like I've got them, they're about to have a referendum
on. I wouldn't say it seemed to claim, but I would say that is a different union.
European Union is not nationalism, it's regionalism. Oh, you mean that the resistance to the European
Union? Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, those are, that's a little bit of a different question because
those are solidified nation states where people have a citizenship and a strong sense of being
a member of a state. And then it's more about modern day interests and what the European
gives versus a lot of the issues that a incipient nationalist movement is trying to convince
people is the right way to see the world. So in places where there wasn't a state and
if elites appeared and tried to convince people that there should be a state like among Kurds
and in Iran or Turkey, it's actually hard, that's my argument. I'm not talking about
established nation states. It's actually harder than it would seem to an outsider to mobilize
people. And I think, okay, so ships and violence, this is a really critical way in which people
can form a sense of groupness. And another thing that violence does is define a group
of people as a victim. So defining a group of people as a victim is a critical step and
that's a step that needs to happen. So how do you do that? That's often why you see violence
because then you get the state to respond and create victims and that can help congeal
a sense of a nationhood. And I think that's what happened in Chechnya. There was not so
clear that there was, Chechen nationalism was strong before the Russians invaded, but it's
not so clear that it would have lasted or that there would have been sustained support
for nationalist state in Chechnya when the leader of that state was terrible authoritarian
leader. But then Russian army comes in and starts killing you because you're a Chechen
and suddenly that becomes your most important identity and you feel a sense of bonding to
other Chechnya and it really created a very strong support for nationalism. So then we
can just think about other ways that victimhood is created. And in my book I talk about a lot
of the ways that entrepreneurs talk about the creation of victimhood is through whether
people are prevented from fulfilling their life in a way that is meaningful to them,
like getting a good job, having their children get good jobs, having high status vis-a-vis
the other groups in their society. And so when an entrepreneur can come in and place
blame on the central state or on the ethnic other in the state for blocking people's
life chances or denying them the jobs or denying them the best apartments, these are
the kinds of rhetoric that were around in Russia that went part of the way, a long way
I argue toward film ending support for or creating a sense of groupness, ethnic groupness
and film ending support for nationalism. What about injustice?
That isn't injustice. It's a personal and an injustice that's framed by the leader as
an ethnic injustice because you're told look you can't get a good education, you can't
get that education, you can't get that professional job, you can't get that white collar job because
you're an ethnic minority. And to the degree that that message is convincing, it's powerful
right? It could be true. It might not be true. It was important when people start to believe
that it's true and perceive that it's true and it can create a sense of victimhood and
a sense of groupness that can then be mobilized by political leaders in support of well now
look at how our group has been victimized if we had our own state. Here's the solution,
we have our own state, we won't be a victim anymore. We can get the best jobs or we can
get the best apartments so we can remove ourselves from years of oppression from the ethnic other.
And in that way it's really critical then to get a state. But is that always an easy
message to sell? I think not. And it's not always clear what the message should be and
nationalist entrepreneurs and politicians aren't geniuses. Some of them may be. Some of them
are better politicians than others but they're not necessarily always aware about which message
is going to take root. They don't exactly know how to frame it. They're not always strategic
about it because they may be a true believer in nationalist ideas and they may just go out there
and talk about what it meant to be an oppressed member of the nation three centuries ago and
that may appeal to some intellectuals but it's not going to appeal to high schoolers or college
kids and so they're not going to support nationalism. I just think there's a lot of roots to nationalism
and a lot of roots away from nationalism and political entrepreneurs have their work cut out
for them to try to find the right message and to try to work with people in a society that has
certain kinds of identities and other ones that might oppose those identities. And in modern societies
I think it's a harder sell than it might have been in an agrarian or in a kind of society
that's transitioning to modernity. So in about five, ten minutes I'm going to ask the audience
for questions so this is your last chance to put your ideas out if you haven't yet.
Well, you know as I said before I mean I appreciate what you're saying. I mean I work in
more agrarian, I mean we're wanting an agrarian society so it's much more, it was much more,
it was easier for them to be manipulated, it was easier for them to get the word out. I mean they
have lots of ways to manipulate them to have them rise up as a group. You know the Hutus really...
What kind of ways? Radio, lots and lots of propaganda, tools, yeah tons and as I said before,
like in Serbia and in Bosnia they thought they were going to be killed. And so I mean my question
is always you know that group identity sort of changed to be you know they were neighbors,
they celebrated together, the Muslims and the Serbs in Bosnia celebrated, they were
live next door to each other and you know one of the rescuers that I interviewed in
Wanda said you know we were one minute you know you're a human being and the next minute you're
a cockroach. It's the same thing as in you know so to make them sub-human they were really good at
that in Germany and in Bosnia and in Rwanda they were really really great propagandists in doing that
but you know why did the one neighbor say you know they still are human beings and how can you,
how can one day one be a human being and the next day they're not. And so those are the kind of
people you really want to look at when you're talking about let's not use the word fanaticism
but when they're going to commit you know this antisocial kind of identity incident or
post-social identity and that I think is really important to look at and there's lots of examples
in every society that have these you know sort of nationalist violent cultures that had happened
in conflict. And just to pick up on that I think the information sources is crucial so again if
you look at the micro level in Bosnia what was used were social networks, informal social networks,
fictive kinship groups, bus drivers who had who knew people all along their roots and that was
that was the that was sort of how information flowed into the society so you're listening to
people who you know and you kind of trust and you hear hey there's a list that the Muslims have
made of all the Serbs are going to be killed in this town and it's like that's insane they would
never do that but you're hearing it from people that you kind of trust because they're part of
your social network and that's when doubt comes in and fear and if you're going are you going to
risk it right so it's a very complex process again it's not this simplistic you push a button and
everyone starts foaming it's a very sophisticated actually social process on the ground that that
leads to these kinds of communities that that come apart and then the violence comes in with
paramilitary groups and then in terms of who commits violence I mean a lot of what's going on as
personal grudges let's say I hate you because you stole my girlfriend when I was in high school and
you just happen to be a Muslim I'm a Serb and now it's open game on all Muslims I can take out my
personal a lot of it as personal grudges a lot of it is resentment you know and some of it may be
sort of national nationalism but that was not there was definitely not enough nationalism on
the ground to explain what happened nationalism defined in terms of an attachment to a particular
what happened between what happened between Turkey and Armenia it was apparently whatever was
decided was decided centrally but it was carried out in territories quite far from the center
so now let's carry it out by the government I mean the Turkish government carried that out
it wasn't I don't think in Armenia it was paramilitary it was really no but the local people started
fighting it yeah but I think one of the things that happens in these cultures that have had conflict
is that especially in the case of Yugoslavia before the war before Tito you know put it together
he said we're one Yugoslavia and they never were able to talk about the old grudges that they had
I mean the Serbs well the Serbs in the I mean they were killing each other they hated each other
actually the Serbs in Kross there was never violence between Serbs in Kross until 1906 under
the Austro-Hungarian I'm talking about the World War II I'm talking about World War II and so and
they did it and they're still doing it in Rwanda killing each other all the time right and there
was never discussion about that one more to happen there were discussions each of the republics
learned about the sins of their own nationalists but I'll also say in the most ethnically mixed
regions of Croatia there was a huge very high 50 percent intermarriage rate of Serbs against Kross
you don't find that if there's like this festering so and for what I you know talking to people
there for them before the war they're like that's ancient history you know and then I remember
talking about the war in Lebanon oh that they really that would never happen here you know this is a
totally we're in a different place and yeah that was history but that was then and so the point is
the violence didn't sort of bubble up from people wanting it really was central it was a central
project and they used many mechanisms to sort of tap into the way same thing in Rwanda and many
of these conflicts that are called ethnic conflicts you know the existing relations on the ground is
not enough to explain what happened even in places where there are historical grievances so yeah you
want to say something before we know no I'll leave it all to questions okay please come to the
you remember this is the panel we were Stephen Pinker's results from his latest book that
violence has greatly declined over the centuries and if so how does your research and your various
theories account for that that's a controversial book and it ended from a brilliant man it reminds
me though Sally Provence who was an infant researcher Yale used to point out that during before the
French Revolution they used to play football with infants throwing them for one to the other breaking
their bones so there may he may be right about let's say a lack of caring about the other but we've
gotten so much better at killing people were far better at it in terms of numbers than we used to
be but killing many fewer people I mean it's I mean at one time you know Europe had wars all the time
before killing each other a hundred years war I mean as bad as this now is nothing compared to
like it was in the past I'm not good at the numbers but I understand between Mao and Stalin they did a
very fine job in the millions and tens of millions but I you know I would I don't know us pinkes his
numbers yeah what when is he saying it started to decline from the beginning with civilization
I think 20th century I think we have kind of a movement about what the 20th century is going to work
while he's not just talking about wars right he's talking about just violence in general
yeah aggression
this build-up of people have each other fanaticism or whatever is it helped or hindered by social
media this is a big debate yeah it's a great question it's a big debate and you know usually
the debate in political science is about whether social media is is helping mobilization and popular
understanding suggests that it did help mobilization and anti-authoritarian mobilization in Egypt
then others argue not we could extrapolate from what I just talked about personal information and of
person you know if we're happening now and they were Facebook and all of these social media on the
one hand you would have information about what's actually happening in a place we'll know it's not
what they're saying on the other hand you might be hearing from your friends about things because
it's sort of again that rumor network so I don't think I want to take the disinformation
so to cut it away we just had a panel at Harriman about I guess it was about demonstrations and
also Ukraine and this subject came up a little bit the idea that well rumors can still spread in
fact social media can help them spread and rumors may not be productive and but then participants
or people who are very well informed about what's going on Ukraine said actually they think Twitter
in particular is very helpful in dismissing rumors because a journalist was there speaking
Russian journalist and she said that her friend was inside the ring of fire or right outside the
in Ukraine that the demonstrators built and if a rumor was begun by the state which the state
in many of these places are putting rumors out via Twitter she could just ask her friend who's
right there they could go over and look so I think this assumes a very small geographic area
and then they can all say to each other oh there is saying that there's going to be a bomb
in an hour at this site but actually we went and checked and there's no bomb and that we can sort
of figure out that that Twitter post was from the government and they're trying to they're trying
to make us scared so some people you know I think it's an open question some people feel like Twitter
can be very useful and others feel like the state is so self-effaceable by Twitter
I'm looking at my iPhone and it defines a fanatic as a person with an extreme and and by the way this
definition is throughout the the internet here a person with an extreme and uncritical enthusiasm
or zeal as in religion or politics and it seems to me that the most important word that you all
have mentioned is the word critical that the lack of a critical approach to anything is what may breed
an excessive irrational zeal which is another word that hasn't come up so I want to ask that my
question is isn't educated I mean just as far as curing is concerned is an education and critical
thinking the greatest goal in order to diffuse various kinds of whatever fanaticism is if it's a
bad thing to reduce it and with a lack of education it seems to me or with a considering continuing
and persistent deficiency in education around the world it's going to be very hard to like
these things out correct I don't know that I agree with that because you mentioned I mean the
early on you said oh well you know in the US we have critical thinking we're individuals but the
places like Russia and Serbia where it's more collectivist there but in fact Serbia is a
authoritarian society the education system is not about critical thinking it definitely wasn't
and yet you have 80 percent of the guys who refuse to go along something else is going on and in
this country in other countries where you have a good education system there are people who
fortunately we're not in a situation where I don't think it's going to go to violence but there are
people nevertheless who are followers of I think uncritical views of things that are could be
called nationalism in particular but some people were killed in Texas or somewhere after the 2011
bombings that people just went and found Muslims and yeah there's that too I actually disagree I think
if you it's an education and a certain kind to think about what choices what right choices you
make and what wrong choices you can make and if you talk about you know you're talking about the
other and dispelling stereotypes and dispelling you know but they didn't have that in Serbia so
how do you explain that so many people refuse to go and I don't know it might be economics was
with Serbia in a bad economic situation probably not what it's actually I don't know anyway
the point is yeah but I do I really do think that teaching certain I think teaching critical
thinking to to people in positive role models and pro-social behavior which we don't is really
important I don't think I know I know I'm just questioning like okay it seems like the basis
of fanaticism we've all kind of understood as something where our value system it has to do with
our personal values and I'm just curious if if we're thinking then that the whole world like there's
a universal value system that everyone's supposed to be abiding by. I want to add something in
response to that to the previous question also about critical thinking because I do depending on
how one and I'm thinking of a democratic society I'm being real parochial I'm thinking of democratic
societies now and the idea of being somehow to teach in the academics and or otherwise how to think
autonomously critically but there's one more ingredient that I want to add that's recent
Paul Ekman and the Dalai Lama wrote a book a few years back on negative emotions looking at it
from a Western and a Tibetan perspective and one of the components of that that Ekman is now coming
out with a new book on this alone was the Dalai Lama's emphasis upon compassion for all sentient
beings all not just other people all sentient beings and the challenge from the Dalai Lama was
to Paul who's a research psychologist he says it is compassion and emotion and Paul spends much
of this book explaining why it's not an emotion and but it can be taught. I agree with that totally
and being able to teach that whatever that means and it may change the idea of what teaching is
to be able to experience a sense of feelings for someone else and the other person's suffering
not only would be instructive but they've done several studies in California using that in the
school system teaching teachers both meditation and compassion and they found less
violence fighting among the kids in those classrooms compared to control classrooms.
So the implication is that there's like a universal system of values.
Well that's a dilemma I am just saying that according to the little bit fanatical in and
you know what Ekman of the Dalai Lama says there's something that can be fundamentally
human across cultures that can be fundamentally human. I mean please I think every culture
values human life. The problem isn't so much education because you could be educated the
problem is what is the situation in the places where we see I think what is the actual structural
situation that people are in right what is the economy like what are their day-to-day lives
like what is going on in terms of the information they're being fed regardless of how educated they
are you know if I I'm as educated as if I heard that someone went and killed my entire family and
everyone on my street or something I would have a reaction right so my point is I'm not against
education obviously and all of this is great but we can't just reduce it to oh people aren't
educated because if that were true we wouldn't be able to explain Serbia and other places where
it's if it's a small I'm not saying that and the idea of Betelheim and Jenna Woods's book is that
there's a balance between inner life and social and political laws and regulations you know when
the Nazis or the Zars said we're suspending laws for a while so you can have a pogrom it doesn't
matter what inner life is like think bad things happen so I agree with that but I'm just responding
that that there's something that we might be able to do and the word education when I was in Israel
one of my students said to me your actually was a soldier said you don't understand what we mean
by education because I said you know where did you go to school and he told me school isn't that
I said okay thank you now we'll turn to this I was interviewing he said well I didn't finish
my education there's two different Hebrew words for education right it's hadraha and his his
point was that the second word for education is what we would call development of character we
don't have a that's good enough for it and he considered and a lot of my soldiers considered a
fundamental part of their education which we don't have an American I went to public school we
we didn't have an American public school developing character that's it there is a character education
movement but okay I don't even want to get into that yeah hi I'm actually from Pakistan so I just
recently moved to the United States to pursue my college so I just wanted to ask something I've
actually seen I'm going to use the word fanaticism in the most colloquial terms that I can so I have
or rather radicalization but whichever I've actually seen one of my friends go through it so I was
just wondering isn't do you think fanaticism and nationalism is the same because we're right now
a couple of days ago our government finally conducted an airstrike against the Taliban and
it's I think it's always been really hard for our government because for us we identify with them
because of religion because we have the same religion but when they start attacking our constitution
it becomes a nationalistic problem and since they recently did that attack our constitution
our government thought it was okay to strike against them and that's nationalism is that a good way to
counter what we usually call fanaticism by nationalism I mean I'm sure you people have studied more about
these things I'm just telling from my personal experience what I've seen
what the question is whether they should have had an airstrike is an airstrike
justified when you have it is it is it the same thing it's not the same thing what do you study
what do I say I'm a liberal arts major liberal arts major study everything come to Boston University
I would love to we'll talk about that it's it's not something that you can learn in three seconds
okay I mean the question is is this faction of can the action of a state be fanatical is that
kind of what you're asking yeah pretty much I don't think most people would use it that way but I
mean then you could also ask well what's the difference right why is the state doing this the
state obviously feels it has a rationalize fanaticism to if you well it's not rationalizing it's not
saying it's okay it's understanding why it's happening right you can still condemn it say this is wrong
but the point is it's important to understand why it's happening what are the conditions
so your friend I had obviously know nothing about your friend but what what's going on with this
person in terms of the lives when you said education she went to the same school as I did we pretty
much had the same stimuli if you say to through media and everything but she turned out different
than I am and though that's why I'm not against education but I don't think education is enough
because this is one yeah kind of what you know so I guess the I wouldn't I understand what you
saying about fanatical but I the reason I don't like the word is because it just that's it fanatic
end of story they just sort of went off the deep end and there might be other things going on
something your mental health states can go off the deep end to your mental health helps thank you
I've enjoyed the discussion but my head spins with the contradictions and depending what data
set you draw from you come to at least the divergent the position so I'm very very taken with the
idea of reflective functioning and how it affects fanaticism but does it cause fanaticism or is
it the other way around is there a breakdown Thomas Kohl had just wrote a book called the German
Generation in which he brings to it a lot of his father's legacy and he talks about this generation
before World War II that came out of World War I and he asked the question you know these are
interviews post World War II and he asked what it enabled them to do and not surprisingly given
his background he says well it was a loss of empathy these soldiers could not imagine being in the shoes
of themselves being the people they they persecuted so then what causes this loss of empathy and
that becomes is it a psychopathic leader a suggestion of the nationalistic entrepreneur that's there's a lot of
evidence for that and it was all there a kid where my mouth style and you go down the list but then
there's contradictory supposition at least as I read it on Timothy Snyder and Neil Ferguson talking
about the worst atrocities occurring in the context of a breakdown of authority I'm thinking about
the idea I heard this wonderful idea about 10 years ago that I I've never heard since or replicated
just not always heated this idea the term that I heard was actually to give credit that was a
professor of globalization at Yale named Arparad Arparaj I can't get his last name he used this term
predatory identity suggesting the kind of person who cannot tolerate the existence of another and
therefore had to use violence to destroy the other and I just you know I was just so taken by that idea
but I haven't seen much develop out of it in contrast Eddie Cohen who was a major in the IDF
and the mental health brigade treated Israeli soldiers and the question is was there breakdown
of function of seeing and identifying with the humanness of of the Palestinians there they were
fighting or was it the other way around so I think we have such a confluence of contradictions here
that I think the only way out of it is to do what what you're doing which is to stay with the data
and generate more and more data sets and try to draw from it meaningful explanations and I know the
ones kind of my identity kind of makes me gravitate toward but and which I become passionate about
but that makes me suspect them more than more thank you can I just I could just make a comment on
yes sure I want to make it clear that you know if you look at the conflicts we've been talking
about it's not because the leaders are crazy and just doing things I'm not saying that they're
totally mentally healthy either but in all of these situations you have structural situations it's
not just one person like Milosha Vich there's a whole structure in place that's being threatened
by changes and my argument is a lot of the violence is used to demobilize populations that otherwise
would be mobilizing for these changes right violence is a way using violence long identity
lines the kinds of things we've been talking about is a way to stop that kind of mobilization in
order for them to restructure themselves to put themselves in a better situation to simplify
so I think unfortunately the media here does portray leaders as these crazy psychopaths and
they're doing it just because they're crazy I'm not saying that they're totally sane but there's
actually very instrumental reasons why these conflicts happen why they start them and why they
why they why they construct them that way so okay
hi first just a comment about benign prejudice which is not always so benign if you're the target
of it so I just wanted to throw that in there but that's not really my question I worked with
veterans here a lot and I talked to them daily and I asked them a lot about what they do what
and I've also learned from working with veterans and reading about it um apparently during World War
One and World War Two when they interviewed soldiers returning they found that only 20
actually shot to try to kill someone I mean that's incredible if that's true but I got this through
some military so around the time of Vietnam they decided we had to do something about this so in
fact the military is very ahead of a lot of us in terms of the science they're looking at they
decided they had to change this so they changed the way they trained our military to dehumanize
objectify the enemy and in fact calling them the enemy and now we're at the point where 80% of
the soldiers will shoot to kill that's big change but also what I was surprised didn't come up I
never heard in all this discussion the word patriotism and uh as a New Yorker and also working with
veterans um I wonder if patriotism is just nationalism that we believe in or convince people because
that's a lot of what a lot of people signed up for military is having more trouble now because now
that they don't have 9-11 to manipulate it's harder to get but they've learned a lot of other things
like that in poor neighborhoods where connections and brotherhood is missing they will go in and
the how they they recruit by which is most likely to get the person to sign up so in poor neighborhoods
they go in and say we will take care of you will be a good parent for you and other places they
might say we're going to give you a job you know or in some other parts of the country they might
say you really have to do this for you know patriotism or whatever but I just wondered your
thoughts about patriotism that's basically my question thank you anybody this is the way
um the word is used in the nationalism which is ours is patriotism nationalism of the others
patriotism of the others is nationalism right this is how it is it's a it's an everyday
understanding of the term nationalism so as academics we're studying a political phenomenon
and the term patriotism pride in being a citizen of a state is something very different it's a
sentiment or a feeling or it's just a different it's a it's a different thing a different category
of thing or you could say patriotism is a part of nationalism but nationalism in an academic
sense or kind of what what we're talking about is is a more of a first of all either an ideology
that there is a nation and that it deserves to have its own state or its political action and
mass behavior toward fulfilling that that ideology so it's not that we're making a um
patriotism is part is not I mean sort of that connection to a state and some states are defined
in particular ethno linguistic ways right is really stupid nationalism and what if you're an
Israeli what the Palestinians do is tell like the rest of the
world is bad and nationalism you know that because we are judging nationalism sometimes to be bad
that we would say patriotism is bad it's a distinction between pride and being a citizen of state
although the Russian Patriots I'm sorry they're nationalists right
Patriots okay question to pose not to be answered just to ask because we as though
the leora and chit one of the one of the findings out of the janowitz in battleheim study was that
that 14% group that had severe prejudice um they spontaneously mentioned and later on they
interviewed them more systematically many of them these are all men of course many of them
reported severe physical abuse by their father in childhood and they didn't find that in the
remaining group so my my question is have other people looked at that systematically
since then this is a study back in the 40s and 50s see please I don't see these are
yeah that's not my that's not my work the work that I do is why people don't do those kinds of
acts and in a lot of it is familiar like your family has had those values and you would have
done the saving you know active saving because your family's done it religious reasons it's not
you know as base as you know because you've been beaten up or stuff like that but but it's also
it really is you know there's several reasons you're a risk taker you're morally religious
like there's a great example of a in the holocaust of a nun he was completely anti-semitic I don't
know if you know this story hated hated hated Jews but because she was so religious she saved many
many people many Jewish people because it was against her religion and so I mean that's a really
good case of showing how you could be prejudiced but sort of overcome it for religious reasons
and you know the other reasons so the risk takers moral religious and you know families have done
those kind you know examples of you know positive post-social behaviors so I don't know about that
at all you might be willing to answer it I mean that's much as rescuers but people who refuse to
go along I haven't actually I'm not really aware of any studies like that on the interesting
other side you know 14 percent of the guys who were some the most religious right I ready to act
on it yeah I don't I don't know any studies that go into that depth about their personal
background yeah okay thank you very much
I was wondering if I should make the point that I feel that we didn't discuss the first
unit that we are exposed to which is our family unit and if your parents are to teach you compassion
and cooperation and a healthy self-esteem that you may be much less likely to get swept away with
fanaticism and behaviors that can hurt other people in future that's what that's our first unit yeah I
mean that is actually I mean that's actually true I mean one of the rescuers that I interviewed was
an Italian guy who had saved some children and he never ever told his family because his his brother
was in a prisoner of war and he would have been able to get him out and he was 92 when we interviewed
him he just the children found him finally through Yod Bisham and when he talked about it he said
after we did the interview actually he said you know I have to tell you this that I never told
anyone in my family but I found out recently that my sister saved our Jewish dentist so it was
definitely there was many many examples of people saving because their family had positive role
models and that is really what you would teach you would teach about positive role models and
you know that you can do this behavior without looking at the really horrible horrific kind of
behavior I think and that's pretty you know easy to teach it's not easy but that's what we teach
one of the things that I was wondering was do you think that there is a physiological neurological
propensity that we can be born with and I'm not seeing nature versus nurture type of thing but
based on Phillips and Bartos Stanford Prison Experiment and how he assigned they just neutral just you
know took kids from the campus and put them in a situation that signed certain ones to be guards
and certain ones to be prisoners and some of the guards became fanatical in the very worst worst
sense and they weren't given any more prodding they weren't given any more
incentive than anybody else but they got much more swept up into it and I'm just wondering if I mean
it is an identity it's an identity with being a guard and and that's you know same thing as a
nationalism or it's what they identified with zealously so I was wondering do you think that there is
beside the things that you were talking about which are very interesting factors and motivators
do you think that there is something maybe genetic something neurological that would
make one person more prone to hop on that bandwagon or to be more malleable to that
that would be my question the other just not a question but I think that you're giving fanaticism
that word just the word a very bad rap because when you think of Nelson Mandela he was a fanatic
he want I think that's just my opinion and I don't think
Leo says he's a fanatic teacher so I don't think I mean but you said that mental illness and you
know all that and I just wanted to say I can think of I mean back to Galileo you know heliocentric
and universe he was a fanatic about that so I think that there can be good it's not an oxymoron
I think you could have a good fanatic but anyway my question just was do you think that there is
something that we can be born with to be hardwired to become fanatical it's my question you are the
MD really this is too complex a question except a simple answer okay interesting things about
humans usually aren't explained by a single gene and a slap upside the head of a kid is very
persuasive whatever their genetic background thank you